# Null Space of a Matrix

- Let $A$ be a $m \times n$ matrix
- The subspace $W = \{x \in \mathbb{R}^n | Ax = 0\}$ of $\mathbb{R}^n$ is called the **Solution Space** of the homogenous system $Ax = 0$ or the **_Null Space_** of $A$.
- Note that the null space is the subspace of $\mathbb{R}^n$. The dimension of the null space is the **_nullity_** of $A$.

$$x,y \in W \implies Ax = Ay = 0 \implies A(x-y) = 0 \implies Ax + Ay = 0 + 0 = 0$$

$$ \lambda \in \mathbb{R} \implies A(\lambda x) = \lambda (Ax) = 0 \implies \lambda 0 = 0 $$

$$\therefore \ \lambda \in W$$

# Finding the nullity and a basis for the null space

- We have seen how to find the dimension and a basis for the row space of A using row reduction.
- We will use row reduction to also find the nullity and a basis for the null space of A.
- First how to find the solution space for a system Ax b i.e. Gaussian elimination.
    - Form the augmented matrix $[A |b]$
    - Applying the elementary row operations to the augmented matrix we reduce the matrix $A$ to its reduced row echelon form and obtain $[R | c]$ where $R$ is the reduced row echelon form of $A$ and $c$ is the reduced row echelon form of $b$.
    - If the $i^{th}$ column has the leading entry of some row, we call $x_i$ a dependent variable.
    - If the $i^{th}$ column has no leading entry, we call $x_i$ an independent variable.
    
    $$ nullity(A) = \text{number of independent variables}$$

- Assign arbitrary values $t_i$ to the $i^{th}$ independent variable.
- Compute the value of each dependent variable in terms of $t_is$ from the unique row it occurs in.
- Every solution is obtained by letting $t_is$ be any real number.

!!! example

    - Consider the homogeneous system $Ax = 0$ where $A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 1 & 1 \\ 2 & 2 & 2 \\ 3 & 3 & 3 \end{bmatrix}$
    - The augmented matrix is $[A | 0] = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 1 & 1 |& 0 \\ 2 & 2 & 2 |& 0 \\ 3 & 3 & 3 |& 0 \end{bmatrix}$
    - Row reduce the augmented matrix to obtain $[R | c] = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 1 & 1 |& 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 |& 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 |& 0 \end{bmatrix}$
    - Here $x_1$ is a dependent variable and $x_2 , x_3$ are independent variables.
        - The first column has the leading entry of the first row hence $x_1$ is a dependent variable.
        - The second and the third column dont have the leading entry of any row , hence $x_2 , x_3$ are independent variables.
    - Hence the nullity of $A$ is 2 because there are 2 independent variables.

    - Put $x_2 = t_1$ and $x_3 = t_2$ that yeilds $x_1 = -t_1 - t_2$.
        - The null space of $A$ is $\{ (-t_1-t_2, t_1,t_2)\}$
        - Now put $t_1 = 0 , t_2 = 1$ and you will get $(-1 , 0 ,1)$.
        - Now put $t_1 = 1 , t_2 = 0$ and you will get $(-1 , 1 , 0)$.
        - Hence the basis vector is $\{(-1,0,1), (-1,1,0)\}$

    - Consider the matrix $A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 2 & 0 & 3 \\ 2 & 3 & 0 & 3 \\ 1 & 1 & 1 & 2 \end{bmatrix}$
        - Applying row reductions on the matrix $A$ we obtain $[R | c] = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 2 & 0 & 3 |& 0 \\ 0 & 1 & 0 & 3 |& 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 & 2 |& 0 \end{bmatrix}$
        - $x_1,x_2 \text{ and } x_3$ are dependent variables and $x_4$ are independent variables.
        - Hence the nullity of $A$ is 1. The null space of $A$ is $\{ (3t,-3t,-2t,t)\}$

## The Rank-Nullity Theorem

- Let $A$ be a $m \times n$ matrix.
- The rank is number of linearly dependent variables in $A$.
- The nullity is the number of linearly independent variables in $A$.
  
$$rank(A) + nullity(A) = n , \text{where n is the number of columns in A}$$
